An official website of the United States government Here's how you know 
Ofﬁcial websites use .gov
A .gov website belongs to an ofﬁcial government
organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A lock (  ) or https:// means you've safely connected
to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only
on ofﬁcial, secure websites.

OSHA Healthcare Standards
Examples of OSHA standards related to healthcare include the Bloodborne Pathogen (BBP) Standard  and Personal
Protective Equipment (PPE) Standard . Both standards require employers to protect workers from occupational exposure
to infectious agents.
The Bloodborne Pathogen Standard:
• Requires employers of workers who may be exposed to blood or other
potentially infectious materials, such as certain tissues and body ﬂuids, to
provide safeguards to protect workers against health hazards related to
bloodborne pathogens. Provisions include exposure control plans, engineering
and work practice controls, hepatitis B vaccination, hazard communication and
training, and recordkeeping.
• Applies to all workers with occupational exposure to blood or other potentially
infectious materials such as saliva during dental procedures and other body
ﬂuids in situations where it is difﬁcult or impossible to differentiate between
body ﬂuids (e.g., synovial, pericardial, urine, feces).
• Requires the use of Universal Precautions, an approach to infection control in
which workers treat all human blood and certain human body ﬂuids as if they are known to be infectious, to protect
against pathogens.
In 1996, CDC recommended the term and use of Standard Precautions, which includes hand hygiene, the use of certain
types of PPE based on anticipated exposure, safe injection practices, and safe management of known or suspected to be
infectious patients. (See OSHA Bloodborne Pathogens – Worker Protections against Occupational Exposure to Infectious
Diseases ).
The Respiratory Protection Standard:


Photo by Getty Images

OSHA Healthcare Standards https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/learning/safetyculturehc/module-5/5.html
1 of 2 6/11/2026, 9:49 PM
 Was this page helpful?
Yes Partly No
• Is designed to protect the health of employees from harmful dusts, fogs, fumes,
mists, gases, smokes, sprays, or vapors. It applies to all occupational exposures
to contaminated air when airborne concentrations exceed an action level or as a
standard precaution (e.g., protection against infectious agents).
• Requires respiratory protection when effective engineering controls (e.g.,
enclosure or conﬁnement of the operation, local exhaust ventilation) are not
feasible or not fully effective.
• Requires employers to provide appropriate respirators (suitable for the intended
purpose) properly ﬁtted to employees when necessary to protect the health of
employees until the workplace implements other more effective controls.
• Requires workplaces using respirators to establish a Respiratory Protection Program.
An effective respiratory protection program  must cover the following factors:
• Written worksite-speciﬁc procedures
• Program evaluation
• Selection of an appropriate NIOSH-approved respirator
• Training
• Fit testing
• Inspection, cleaning, maintenance, and storage of respirators
• Medical evaluation and determination of employee’s ability to wear a respirator
• Work area surveillance
• Air quality standards
The OSHA Hospital Respiratory Protection Program Toolkit  also provides recommendations and descriptions of
mandatory safety and health standards.
Photo by Getty Images

 
Previous
Next
Last Reviewed: April 28, 2022
Source: National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
OSHA Healthcare Standards https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/learning/safetyculturehc/module-5/5.html
2 of 2 6/11/2026, 9:49 PM